README.md, before:

# Structural mapping of Next Generation Sequencing Antibody (Ig-seq) repertoires.

This code is a protocol/pipeline for performing large-scale structural annotations of antibody sequencing repertoires. In other words, giving you majority of info that structural modeling would do, without performing structural modeling per se.

## Requirements.

This code is designed to run ona Unix system (Linux or at the very least Os X). You **might** be able to run it on Windows, but I never tested it in such setup as I could not see a reasonable application for it. 

This protocol assumes that the input is a FASTA-formatted file of amino-acid sequences. If you do not know how to translate your input into amino-acid FASTA, please have a look at IGBlast or IMGT V-Quest.

The main dependency of this code is ANARCI, which is currently packaged with the code. The two dependencies that you would have to install yourself as they are system-dependent are numpy and hmmer. Numpy you can install using pip:

```
sudo pip install numpy
```

hmmer you can install from the source on their website (http://hmmer.org/) or on ubuntu by:

```
sudo apt-get install hmmer
```

Otherwise it is supposed to work out of the box as described below. If it doesn't drop an email to konrad.krawczyk@stats.ox.ac.uk

## Install

Simply git clone the repo:

```
git clone https://github.com/panzerschnitzel/StructuralMapping.git
```

Navigate to the folder that you just cloned. Throughout I am assuming that you are running from the 'code' directory in this repository.

### A Structurally Mapping a single sequence.

Navigate to the 'code' directory and from here, type

```
python StructuralAlignment.py process_single EVQLQQSGAEVVRSGASVKLSCTASGFNIKDYYIHWVKQRPEKGLEWIGWIDPEIGDTEYVPKFQGKATMTADTSSNTAYLQLSSLTSEDTAVYYCNAGHDYDRGRFPYWGQGTLVTVSAAKTTPPSVYPLAPGSAAQTNSMVTLGCLVKGYFPEPVTVTWNSGSLSSGVHTFPAVLQSDLYTLSSSVTVPSSTWPSETVTCNVAHPASSTKVDKKIVPRD
```

Results are displayed on output and should look like this (if they do not look like this, ANARCI might not be working so check your hmmer and numpy installs):
```
({'best_pdb': '12e8P', 'best_sid': 100}, {'best_pdb': '12e8P', 'best_sid': 100}, {'best_pdb': '12e8P', 'best_sid': 100}, {'H2': [(45, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPEIGD', 'str': u'12e8P', 'scr': 45}), (45, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPEIGD', 'str': u'12e8H', 'scr': 45}), (32, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPENGD', 'str': u'1il1A', 'scr': 32}), (31, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPENGD', 'str': u'5aamB', 'scr': 31}), (31, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPENGD', 'str': u'5aamA', 'scr': 31}), (31, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPENGD', 'str': u'4tqeH', 'scr': 31}), (31, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPENGD', 'str': u'4tprH', 'scr': 31}), (31, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPENGD', 'str': u'1qokA', 'scr': 31}), (27, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPESGE', 'str': u'1iqdB', 'scr': 27}), (27, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPEQGN', 'str': u'1pg7I', 'scr': 27})], 'H3': [(97, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'str': u'12e8P', 'scr': 97}), (97, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'str': u'12e8H', 'scr': 97}), (32, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'DHDGYYERFAY', 'str': u'3okmB', 'scr': 32}), (30, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'DHDGYYERFAY', 'str': u'3okeB', 'scr': 30}), (28, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'DHDGYYERFSY', 'str': u'3t65B', 'scr': 28}), (28, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'DHDGYYERFSY', 'str': u'3t4yB', 'scr': 28}), (28, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'DHDGYYERFSY', 'str': u'3sy0B', 'scr': 28}), (28, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'DHDGYYERFSY', 'str': u'2r2hB', 'scr': 28}), (28, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'DHDGYYERFSY', 'str': u'2r2bB', 'scr': 28}), (28, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'DHDGYYERFSY', 'str': u'2r23B', 'scr': 28})], 'H1': [(56, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFNIKDY', 'str': u'1fgnH', 'scr': 56}), (51, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFNIKEY', 'str': u'1jptH', 'scr': 51}), (51, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFNIKEY', 'str': u'1jpsH', 'scr': 51}), (44, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFDISDY', 'str': u'5dscE', 'scr': 44}), (44, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFDISDY', 'str': u'5dscA', 'scr': 44}), (44, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFDISDY', 'str': u'5drnH', 'scr': 44}), (44, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFDISDY', 'str': u'5drnA', 'scr': 44}), (42, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFTISDY', 'str': u'3auvF', 'scr': 42}), (42, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFTISDY', 'str': u'3auvE', 'scr': 42}), (42, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFTISDY', 'str': u'3auvD', 'scr': 42})]})
```

### B Results


For instance a single sequence has the following annotations:

```
"B_d075d1700ee60c141873c2069c4c2fdb": { <<--- ID of the sequence
		"frame": { <<--- Best Chothia alignment results for Chothia framework region.
			"best_pdb": "5v7rH", <<--- Best Chothia framework  region template (PDB + chain)
			"best_sid": 87  <<--- Best Chothia framework  sequence identity (for template above)
		},
		"full": { <<--- Best Chothia alignment results for entire variable region
			"best_pdb": "5v7rH", <<--- Best full variable region template (PDB + chain)
			"best_sid": 76  <<--- Best Chothia framework  sequence identity (for template above)
		},
		"cdr": { <<--- Best Chothia alignment for all CDRs taken together.
			"best_pdb": "4nikB", <<--- Template which best matches the three CDRs together.
			"best_sid": 56 <<--- Sequence identity of the entire sequence region.
		}
		"fread": { <<--- Best results for each specific CDR
			"H2": { <<---CDR identifier
				"qu": "SGDEGY",  <<---query sequence
				"seq": "NGNSGY", <<---best sequence match according to FREAD -- None if none are found.
				"str": "4n9gH", <<---structure the template is coming from.
				"scr": 25 <<---score of this best template -- the higher the better.
			},
			"H3": {
				"qu": "GSNDWYGIDY",
				"seq": "DPLEYYGMDY",
				"str": "1qkzH",
				"scr": 35
			},
			"H1": {
				"qu": "GFTFSNF",
				"seq": "GFTFTNY",
				"str": "1e4xI",
				"scr": 49
			}
		},
```
### C Parallelization of the protocol.

As you might've noticed, running this pipeline on a single thread on millions of sequences might not be optimal.

We have a sample set located in data/raw/fasta/sample.fasta which we will use as an example for this protocol.  

To get the parallelization script the command is:

```
python DataProcessing.py parallel [exp_name] [fasta_location] number-of-cpus number-of-seqs
```

This will print out on the command line, you might want to pipe it into a suitable bash script:

python DataProcessing.py parallel [exp_name] [fasta_location] number-of-cpus number-of-seqs > structurally_map.sh

You need to specify how many sequences there are in the fasta file, and how many parallel jobs you want to run at the same time. For instance, assuming that I have 6,666,666 sequences and want to run 78 parallel jobs on the sample experiment above, I'd type:

```
python DataProcessing.py parallel sample ../data/raw/fasta/sample.fasta  78 6666666 > structurally_map.sh
```

You might want to look at the contents of structurally_map.sh if you want to figure out how to run the protocol only on chunks of your data -- it is essentially a collection of python scripts that runs on subsets of lines from the fasta file you specify.

Now simply run the structurally_map.sh script which will kick off the 78 processes:

```
./structuarlly_map.sh
```

**NB** You might have to make it executable 

```
chmod u+rx structurally_map.sh
```

Results stored under data/structuralmap/[experiment name] and are a collection of json-formatted files with structural annotation for each sequences submitted (as described in B). A given file is a list from sequence identifiers (as you have specified them in input) to results.


As above, you specify the number of CPUs and the name of the experiment. Continuing with our sample experiment this would be (to run on two CPus):

```
python StructuralAlignment.py parallel sample 2 > structurally_map.sh
```

**NB** If number of CPUs is greater than the number of chunks in the data/numbered/[exp name] folder, this will clearly fail. 

### D Finding the structures most mapped to in the dataset.

We provide a facility to find out which structures are the most commonly mapped to in your dataset. Assuming that you have structurally mapped your data and named them MY_EXP you can create the global mapping statistics as follows:

```
python StructuralResults.py  summary MY_EXP
```
This will create the following files in data/summaries/[MY_EXP]:

* top_50.csv - top 50 pdbs for each of cdrs, framework, full variable region and globally (taken as aggregate).
* CDR_pdb.txt - loops of the given CDR that map to the pdb from top_50.

Commit message:

Updated readme with more hmmer version info

README.md, after:

# Structural mapping of Next Generation Sequencing Antibody (Ig-seq) repertoires.

This code is a protocol/pipeline for performing large-scale structural annotations of antibody sequencing repertoires. In other words, giving you majority of info that structural modeling would do, without performing structural modeling per se.

## Requirements.

This code is designed to run ona Unix system (Linux or at the very least Os X). You **might** be able to run it on Windows, but I never tested it in such setup as I could not see a reasonable application for it. 

This protocol assumes that the input is a FASTA-formatted file of amino-acid sequences. If you do not know how to translate your input into amino-acid FASTA, please have a look at IGBlast or IMGT V-Quest.

The main dependency of this code is ANARCI, which is currently packaged with the code. The two dependencies that you would have to install yourself as they are system-dependent are numpy and hmmer. Numpy you can install using pip:

```
sudo pip install numpy
```

hmmer you can install from the source on their website (http://hmmer.org/) or on ubuntu by:

```
sudo apt-get install hmmer
```

(It was tested to work with version 3.1b).

Otherwise it is supposed to work out of the box as described below. If it doesn't drop an email to konrad.krawczyk@stats.ox.ac.uk

## Install

Simply git clone the repo:

```
git clone https://github.com/panzerschnitzel/StructuralMapping.git
```

Navigate to the folder that you just cloned. Throughout I am assuming that you are running from the 'code' directory in this repository.

### A Structurally Mapping a single sequence.

Navigate to the 'code' directory and from here, type

```
python StructuralAlignment.py process_single EVQLQQSGAEVVRSGASVKLSCTASGFNIKDYYIHWVKQRPEKGLEWIGWIDPEIGDTEYVPKFQGKATMTADTSSNTAYLQLSSLTSEDTAVYYCNAGHDYDRGRFPYWGQGTLVTVSAAKTTPPSVYPLAPGSAAQTNSMVTLGCLVKGYFPEPVTVTWNSGSLSSGVHTFPAVLQSDLYTLSSSVTVPSSTWPSETVTCNVAHPASSTKVDKKIVPRD
```

Results are displayed on output and should look like this (if they do not look like this, ANARCI might not be working so check your hmmer and numpy installs):
```
({'best_pdb': '12e8P', 'best_sid': 100}, {'best_pdb': '12e8P', 'best_sid': 100}, {'best_pdb': '12e8P', 'best_sid': 100}, {'H2': [(45, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPEIGD', 'str': u'12e8P', 'scr': 45}), (45, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPEIGD', 'str': u'12e8H', 'scr': 45}), (32, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPENGD', 'str': u'1il1A', 'scr': 32}), (31, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPENGD', 'str': u'5aamB', 'scr': 31}), (31, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPENGD', 'str': u'5aamA', 'scr': 31}), (31, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPENGD', 'str': u'4tqeH', 'scr': 31}), (31, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPENGD', 'str': u'4tprH', 'scr': 31}), (31, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPENGD', 'str': u'1qokA', 'scr': 31}), (27, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPESGE', 'str': u'1iqdB', 'scr': 27}), (27, {'qu': 'DPEIGD', 'seq': u'DPEQGN', 'str': u'1pg7I', 'scr': 27})], 'H3': [(97, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'str': u'12e8P', 'scr': 97}), (97, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'str': u'12e8H', 'scr': 97}), (32, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'DHDGYYERFAY', 'str': u'3okmB', 'scr': 32}), (30, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'DHDGYYERFAY', 'str': u'3okeB', 'scr': 30}), (28, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'DHDGYYERFSY', 'str': u'3t65B', 'scr': 28}), (28, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'DHDGYYERFSY', 'str': u'3t4yB', 'scr': 28}), (28, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'DHDGYYERFSY', 'str': u'3sy0B', 'scr': 28}), (28, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'DHDGYYERFSY', 'str': u'2r2hB', 'scr': 28}), (28, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'DHDGYYERFSY', 'str': u'2r2bB', 'scr': 28}), (28, {'qu': 'GHDYDRGRFPY', 'seq': u'DHDGYYERFSY', 'str': u'2r23B', 'scr': 28})], 'H1': [(56, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFNIKDY', 'str': u'1fgnH', 'scr': 56}), (51, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFNIKEY', 'str': u'1jptH', 'scr': 51}), (51, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFNIKEY', 'str': u'1jpsH', 'scr': 51}), (44, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFDISDY', 'str': u'5dscE', 'scr': 44}), (44, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFDISDY', 'str': u'5dscA', 'scr': 44}), (44, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFDISDY', 'str': u'5drnH', 'scr': 44}), (44, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFDISDY', 'str': u'5drnA', 'scr': 44}), (42, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFTISDY', 'str': u'3auvF', 'scr': 42}), (42, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFTISDY', 'str': u'3auvE', 'scr': 42}), (42, {'qu': 'GFNIKDY', 'seq': u'GFTISDY', 'str': u'3auvD', 'scr': 42})]})
```

If you do not see a meaningful result as above, it might mean that something is off in your configuration -- not right version of hmmer, numpy or so. If you do not manage to troubleshoot yourself, contact konrad.krawczyk@stats.ox.ac.uk

### B Results


For instance a single sequence has the following annotations:

```
"B_d075d1700ee60c141873c2069c4c2fdb": { <<--- ID of the sequence
		"frame": { <<--- Best Chothia alignment results for Chothia framework region.
			"best_pdb": "5v7rH", <<--- Best Chothia framework  region template (PDB + chain)
			"best_sid": 87  <<--- Best Chothia framework  sequence identity (for template above)
		},
		"full": { <<--- Best Chothia alignment results for entire variable region
			"best_pdb": "5v7rH", <<--- Best full variable region template (PDB + chain)
			"best_sid": 76  <<--- Best Chothia framework  sequence identity (for template above)
		},
		"cdr": { <<--- Best Chothia alignment for all CDRs taken together.
			"best_pdb": "4nikB", <<--- Template which best matches the three CDRs together.
			"best_sid": 56 <<--- Sequence identity of the entire sequence region.
		}
		"fread": { <<--- Best results for each specific CDR
			"H2": { <<---CDR identifier
				"qu": "SGDEGY",  <<---query sequence
				"seq": "NGNSGY", <<---best sequence match according to FREAD -- None if none are found.
				"str": "4n9gH", <<---structure the template is coming from.
				"scr": 25 <<---score of this best template -- the higher the better.
			},
			"H3": {
				"qu": "GSNDWYGIDY",
				"seq": "DPLEYYGMDY",
				"str": "1qkzH",
				"scr": 35
			},
			"H1": {
				"qu": "GFTFSNF",
				"seq": "GFTFTNY",
				"str": "1e4xI",
				"scr": 49
			}
		},
```
### C Parallelization of the protocol.

As you might've noticed, running this pipeline on a single thread on millions of sequences might not be optimal.

We have a sample set located in data/raw/fasta/sample.fasta which we will use as an example for this protocol.  

To get the parallelization script the command is:

```
python DataProcessing.py parallel [exp_name] [fasta_location] number-of-cpus number-of-seqs
```

This will print out on the command line, you might want to pipe it into a suitable bash script:

python DataProcessing.py parallel [exp_name] [fasta_location] number-of-cpus number-of-seqs > structurally_map.sh

You need to specify how many sequences there are in the fasta file, and how many parallel jobs you want to run at the same time. For instance, assuming that I have 6,666,666 sequences and want to run 78 parallel jobs on the sample experiment above, I'd type:

```
python DataProcessing.py parallel sample ../data/raw/fasta/sample.fasta  78 6666666 > structurally_map.sh
```

You might want to look at the contents of structurally_map.sh if you want to figure out how to run the protocol only on chunks of your data -- it is essentially a collection of python scripts that runs on subsets of lines from the fasta file you specify.

Now simply run the structurally_map.sh script which will kick off the 78 processes:

```
./structuarlly_map.sh
```

**NB** You might have to make it executable 

```
chmod u+rx structurally_map.sh
```

Results stored under data/structuralmap/[experiment name] and are a collection of json-formatted files with structural annotation for each sequences submitted (as described in B). A given file is a list from sequence identifiers (as you have specified them in input) to results.


As above, you specify the number of CPUs and the name of the experiment. Continuing with our sample experiment this would be (to run on two CPus):

```
python StructuralAlignment.py parallel sample 2 > structurally_map.sh
```

**NB** If number of CPUs is greater than the number of chunks in the data/numbered/[exp name] folder, this will clearly fail. 

### D Finding the structures most mapped to in the dataset.

We provide a facility to find out which structures are the most commonly mapped to in your dataset. Assuming that you have structurally mapped your data and named them MY_EXP you can create the global mapping statistics as follows:

```
python StructuralResults.py  summary MY_EXP
```
This will create the following files in data/summaries/[MY_EXP]:

* top_50.csv - top 50 pdbs for each of cdrs, framework, full variable region and globally (taken as aggregate).
* CDR_pdb.txt - loops of the given CDR that map to the pdb from top_50.
